Tutorial | Custom Shape Tool in C++ and Python (#1119)
o3de/o3de.org: content/docs/learning-guide/tutorials/custom-tools/shape-example-cpp.md

---
linkTitle: Create a Custom Shape Tool in C++
title: Create a Custom Shape Tool in C++ for Open 3D Engine
description: Learn to create a custom shape tool in C++ to extend Open 3D Engine (O3DE).
weight: 200
toc: true
---

> 

Reviewer: My suggestion here is to add a screenshot of the sample. This will entice and encourage readers to know what is happening on this page.

Reviewer 2: This should be unblocked now

    ```cmd
    scripts/o3de create-gem --gem-name ShapeExample --template-name CppToolGem
    ```

2. Add the Gem in your project by using the `o3de` script.

    ```cmd
    scripts/o3de enable-gem -gn CppToolGem -pp <project-path>
    ```

    Or, enable the Gem using the Project Manager (refer to [Adding and Removing Gems in a Project](/docs/user-guide/project-config/add-remove-gems.md)).

3. Build the project by using the `o3de` script (refer to [Build a project](https://o3de.org/docs/user-guide/build/configure-and-build/#build-a-project)). Or, use the Project Manager (refer to the **Build** action in the [Project Manager](https://o3de.org/docs/user-guide/project-config/project-manager/)) page.

4. Open O3DE Editor for your project.

> 5. Open the tool by selecting **Tools > Examples**.

Reviewer: Suggestion to change this to: Open the tool by selecting Tools > Examples from the file menu.

> 

Reviewer: Could we add a screenshot of where this is on the File Menu? Just a nice and simple one. We don't need to screen shot the whole editor. Just the top left section of it with the File Menu open.

Now you can access your new tool from O3DE Editor. By default, this tool contains a simple user interface (UI). In the next steps, we'll design the tool's UI and code its functionality.

## Code directory

In the ShapeExample Gem's `Code/Source` directory, you'll find the following files that make up your custom tool.

### Modules and system components

> All Gems have modules and system components that connect the tool to O3DE and allow it to communicate with other systems. The CppToolGem template already contains all of the code needed to run the tool in the O3DE Editor. 

Reviewer: Add code pull out for the word **CppToolGem**, in this sentence.

   
2. Later, you will create various UI elements and add them to the `mainLayout`. 

3. We recommend that you add a stretch at the bottom of `mainLayout` using `addStretch()` to fill any expanded space when you resize the window. 

4. Finally, set `mainLayout` to be the layout for this widget using `setLayout()`. 

```cpp
ShapeExampleWidget::ShapeExampleWidget(QWidget* parent)
    : QWidget(parent)
{
    setWindowTitle(QObject::tr("ShapeExample"));

    QVBoxLayout* mainLayout = new QVBoxLayout(this);

    // Add various UI elements to mainLayout

    mainLayout->addStretch();

    setLayout(mainLayout);
}
```

## Input fields and check boxes

In this step, you will create an input field for the entity's name and a check box to append a suffix that contains the component's name. For example, suppose you set the entity's name to "MyEntity" and enable the suffix check box. When you create Shape components of type Box and Sphere, they will respectively be named "MyEntity_BoxShape" and "MyEntity_SphereShape".

First, wrap these UI elements in their own sub-widget, set the layout, and add it to the main widget. 

> 1. To start, instantiate a `QWidget` called `entityNameWidget` and a `QFormLayout` called `formLayout`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. To start, instantiate a `QGroupBox` called `entityNameWidget` and a `QFormLayout` called `formLayout`.
```

In the latest code, instead of just a `QWidget` we create a `QGroupBox`, mostly just for stylistic reasons

   
2. Later, you will create the input field and check box and add them to this widget. 

3. Finally, set the layout of `entityNameWidget` to `formLayout`, and add `entityNameWidget` to `mainLayout`. 

```cpp
QWidget* entityNameWidget = new QWidget(this);
QFormLayout* formLayout = new QFormLayout();

// Create an input field and check box

entityNameWidget->setLayout(formLayout);
mainLayout->addWidget(entityNameWidget);
```

### Add an input field

> 

Reviewer: I would love to see screenshots under this headings of what the heading is referring to. E.g. Input field.

> Next, create an input field using the `QLineEdit` object called `m_nameInput`. Set the placeholder text in the input field using `setPlaceholderText(...)` and toggle a button to clear the text using `setClearButtonEnabled(...)`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next, create an input field using the `QLineEdit` object called `m_nameInput`. Set the placeholder text in the input field using `setPlaceholderText(...)` and enable a button (X) to clear the text using `setClearButtonEnabled(...)`.
```

```cpp
m_nameInput = new QLineEdit(this);
m_nameInput->setPlaceholderText(QObject::tr("Set custom Entity name here..."));
m_nameInput->setClearButtonEnabled(true);
```

### Add a check box

> 

Reviewer: I would love to see screenshots under this headings of what the heading is referring to. E.g. Check Box

> Then, create a check box using the `QCheckBox` object called `m_addShapeNameSuffix`. You can enable or disable the check box by default using `setDisabled(...)`.

Reviewer 2: I want to change the second sentence, but I'm not sure how. Basically, we add code later in the tutorial that enables/disables the check box dynamically if the user types text into the "entity name" input field. So, we definitely want this to start as disabled, since the "entity name" input field starts off empty.

Maybe we could say something like "You can set the enabled/disabled state on any widget with this API https://doc.qt.io/qt-5/qwidget.html#enabled-prop. This controls whether or not a widget handles mouse/keyboard events, and can change how they are displayed. We will start with this check box in the disabled state, and in the next section will show you how to toggle it at runtime."

```cpp
m_addShapeNameSuffix = new QCheckBox(this);
m_addShapeNameSuffix->setDisabled(true);
```

### Add a signal listener with a slot handler

> Qt uses signals and slots to communicate between objects (refer to [Signals & Slots](https://doc.qt.io/qt-5/signalsandslots.html) in Qt Documentation). You will set up a signal listener such that when the user updates the input field, the check box automatically enables. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Qt uses signals and slots to communicate between objects (refer to [Signals & Slots](https://doc.qt.io/qt-5/signalsandslots.html) in Qt Documentation). You will set up a signal listener such that when the user enters text into the input field, the check box automatically enables. 
```

> In this example, the signal listener uses a slot handler, which is essentially a C++ function that a signal can connect to. 

Reviewer 2: Nice!

1. Define a slot by using the `Q_SLOTS` macro as shown in the following line of `ShapeExampleWidget.h`:

    ```cpp
    private Q_SLOTS:
        void OnNameInputTextChanged(const QString& text);
    ```

2. Call `QObject::connect(...)` to create a connection between the input field (`m_nameInput`) to the signal (`QLineEdit::TextChanged`) and slot (ShapeExampleWidget::OnNameINputTextChanged`). Refer to the following line of `ShapeExampleWidget.cpp`.

```cpp
QObject::connect(m_nameInput, &QLineEdit::textChanged, this, &ShapeExampleWidget::OnNameInputTextChanged);
```

3. Define `OnNameInputTextChanged(...)` in `ShapeExampleWidget.cpp`. This function checks if `m_nameInput` contains text, and if so, enables `m_addShapeNameSuffix`. 

```cpp
void ShapeExampleWidget::OnNameInputTextChanged(const QString& text)
{   
    m_addShapeNameSuffix->setEnabled(!text.isEmpty());
}
```

## Buttons

> 

Reviewer: I would love to see screenshots under this headings of what the heading is referring to. E.g. Buttons

In this step, you will create a collection of buttons that create an entity of different shape types, such as a box, sphere, cone, and so on. 

Again, wrap these UI elements in their own sub-widget, set the layout, and add it to the main widget. 

> 1. To start, instantiate a `QWidget` called `shapeButtons` and a `QGridLayout` called `gridLayout`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. To start, instantiate a `QGroupBox` called `shapeButtons` and a `QGridLayout` called `gridLayout`.
```

> 2. Later, you will query types of shape components, add buttons to this widget, and add signal listeners to the buttons.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Later, you will query for all types of shape components registered with the engine, add buttons to this widget, and add signal listeners to the buttons.
```

3. Finally, set the layout of `shapeButtons` to `gridLayout`, and add `shapeButtons` to `mainLayout`. 

```cpp
// 1
QWidget* shapeButtons = new QWidget(this);
QGridLayout* gridLayout = new QGridLayout();

// 2

// 3
shapeButtons->setLayout(gridLayout);
mainLayout->addWidget(shapeButtons);
```

### Query types of Shape components

> First, query the types of shape components by specifying a list of provided services. In O3DE, all components have a list of provided services, that you can query from. In this example, Shape components provide the "ShapeService". 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, query the types of shape components registered with the engine. In O3DE, all components have a list of provided services that you can query from. In this example, we are looking for Shape components, which all provide the "ShapeService". 
```

```cpp
AzToolsFramework::EntityCompositionRequests::ComponentServicesList providedServices;
providedServices.push_back(AZ_CRC_CE("ShapeService"));

AZ::ComponentTypeList typeIds;
AzToolsFramework::EditorComponentAPIBus::BroadcastResult(
    typeIds,
    &AzToolsFramework::EditorComponentAPIRequests::FindComponentTypeIdsByService,
    providedServices,
    AzToolsFramework::EntityCompositionRequests::ComponentServicesList()
);
```

Next, get the names of the components to add to the buttons. 

1. Get a list of component names. Call `AzToolsFramework::EditorComponentAPIBus::BroadcastResult(...)` and dispatch `AzToolsFramework::EditorComponentAPIRequests::FindComponentTypeNames`, which takes the list of component types (`typeIds`) and stores the associated of component names to `componentNames`.

```cpp
AZStd::vector<AZStd::string> componentNames;
AzToolsFramework::EditorComponentAPIBus::BroadcastResult(
    componentNames,
    &AzToolsFramework::EditorComponentAPIRequests::FindComponentTypeNames,
    typeIds
);
```

{{ note }}
You can query a list of services that components provide by calling the component's `GetProvidedServices()` method.
{{ /note }}

### Add buttons

> 

Reviewer: I would love to see screenshots under this headings of what the heading is referring to. E.g. Buttons

> Next, you will loop through the list of components, create buttons, and add them to the `gridLayout`. Refer to the following snippet in `ShapeEXampleQWidget.cpp`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next, you will loop through the list of components, create buttons, and add them to the `gridLayout`. Refer to the following snippet in `ShapeExampleQWidget.cpp`.
```

For each component:

1. Store the component's name and type from the list of component names and types that you queried earlier.

2. Create a button using the QButton object called `shapeButton`. 
   - Pass in `name` to add the component's name onto the button. 

>    - Set the button minimum height to `40` by using `setMinimumHeight(...)`. 

Reviewer 2: Can remove this line since we aren't using the icons anymore we don't need to set the minimum height.

3. Later, you will connect `shapeButton` to a signal listener. 

4. Add the button to `gridLayout`, which is split into three columns. 

```cpp
const int maxColumnCount = 3;
for (int i = 0; i < componentNames.size(); ++i)
{
    AZStd::string name = componentNames[i];
    AZ::TypeId typeId = typeIds[i];

    QPushButton* shapeButton = new QPushButton(QString::fromUtf8(name.c_str()), this);

>     shapeButton->setMinimumHeight(40);

Reviewer 2: Mentioned above, can remove this call to `setMinimumHeight`

    // Connect 

    int row = i / maxColumnCount;
    int column = i % maxColumnCount;
    gridLayout->addWidget(shapeButton, row, column);
}

```

### Add a signal listener with a lambda handler

> Next, you will create a signal listener such that when the user clicks a button, an entity with the corresponding Shape component will spawn in your scene. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next, you will create a signal listener such that when the user clicks a button, an entity will be created in your scene and the corresponding Shape component will be added to that entity.
```

I rephrased this slightly to not use the word "spawn", since that has a meaning specific to prefabs.

In this example, the signal listener uses a lambda handler, so you can define the C++ function without defining a slot.

1. Define `CreateEntityWithShapeComponent` as a standard C++ function in `ShapeExampleWidget.h`. This function accepts an `AZ::TypeId&` as a parameter so it can create an entity with the specified component type.

    ```cpp
    private:
        void CreateEntityWithShapeComponent(const AZ::TypeId& typeId);
    ```

> 2. In the for loop that you created earlier, create a connection from the `clicked` signal in the `shapeButton` to the lambda function in `this`. The lambda function calls `CreateEntityWithShapeComponent(...)` and passes in the `typeId`. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. In the for loop that you created earlier, create a connection from the `clicked` signal in the `shapeButton` to the lambda function in `this`. The lambda function calls `CreateEntityWithShapeComponent(...)` and captures the `typeId` for the shape component being iterated over. 
```

    ```cpp
    QObject::connect(shapeButton, &QPushButton::clicked, this, [this, typeId]() {
        CreateEntityWithShapeComponent(typeId);
    });
    ```

> ### Communicate with EBusses

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Communicate with EBuses
```

> Now, you will define `CreateEntityWithShapeComponent(...)`, which uses communicates with O3DE EBusses to create a new entity with a component specified by the `typeId` parameter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, you will define `CreateEntityWithShapeComponent(...)`, which communicates with O3DE EBuses to create a new entity with a component specified by the `typeId` parameter.
```

> 1. Use the namespace `AzToolsFramework`. This namespace provides APIs to the necessary Editor EBusses. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Use the namespace `AzToolsFramework`. This namespace provides APIs to the necessary Editor EBuses. 
```

I'm not sure if we want to call this out explicitly. I did the `using namespace AzToolsFramework` just to make some of the ebus calls shorter/more readable, since otherwise you'd have to put `AzToolsFramework::` on the beginning of each of them. So maybe we could just say that?  Or nothing at all

> 2. Send a request to create a new entity by calling `EditorRequestBus::BroadcastResult(...)`. Dispatch the `EditorRequests::CreateNewEntity` event, which instantiates an `AZ::EntityId` and stores it in `newEntityId`. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Send a request to create a new entity by calling `EditorRequestBus::BroadcastResult(...)`. Dispatch the `EditorRequests::CreateNewEntity` event, which creates a new Entity and returns its `AZ::EntityId`, which is stored in `newEntityId`. 
```

        EditorRequestBus::BroadcastResult(newEntityId, &EditorRequests::CreateNewEntity, AZ::EntityId());

        // 3
        if (!m_nameInput->text().isEmpty())
        {
            QString entityName = m_nameInput->text();

            if (m_addShapeNameSuffix->isChecked())
            {
                AZStd::vector<AZStd::string> componentNames;
                EditorComponentAPIBus::BroadcastResult(
                    componentNames,
                    &EditorComponentAPIRequests::FindComponentTypeNames,
                    AZ::ComponentTypeList{ typeId }
                );

                AZ_Assert(componentNames.size() == 1, "Unable to find component name");

                QString shapeName(componentNames[0].c_str());
                shapeName.replace(" ", "");

                entityName = QString("%1_%2").arg(entityName).arg(shapeName);
            }
            
            EditorEntityAPIBus::Event(newEntityId, &EditorEntityAPIRequests::SetName, entityName.toUtf8().constData());
        }

        // 4
        EditorComponentAPIBus::Broadcast(&EditorComponentAPIRequests::AddComponentsOfType, newEntityId, AZ::ComponentTypeList{ typeId });
    }
```

> ## Icon

Reviewer 2: This whole section about icons would probably be good to explain, but they don't actually need to add this code. When you create the `ShapeExample` gem from our custom tool gemplate, this code for registering your icon and initializing the resource is already done for you from the template.

An icon is an image file that's used to represent your tool in the O3DE Editor. You will store the icon using the Qt Resource System and load it from your Gem module. We recommend that your icon adheres to the guidelines in [UI development best practices](https://o3de.org/docs/tools-ui/uidev-component-development-guidelines/#ui-development-best-practices).

### Add an icon

> 

Reviewer: I would love to see screenshots under this headings of what the heading is referring to. E.g. Icon

1. Add an image file to the `Code/Source` directory to use as your icon.
   
2. Add your icon to your Gem's resources by updating `ShapeExample.qrc` with your new icon's file name. 

3. Register your Gem's resources in Qt by adding the following code in `EditorModule.cpp`. 

    - Define the function `InitShapeExampleResource()` and call `Q_INIT_RESOURCE(...)` to register the Qt resrouces listed in `ShapeExample.qrc`.

        ```cpp
        void InitShapeExampleResources()
        {
            Q_INIT_RESOURCE(ShapeExample);
        }
        ```

    - Call `InitShapeExampleResource()` in the class constructor.

> 

Reviewer: Add a new call out heading / section here. Similar to what "Icon" is styled as. Maybe you can call it "Download the Sample file"

And have an animated gif of the sample being used in the editor (5-7s loop?)

---
linkTitle: Create a Custom Shape Tool in C++
title: Create a Custom Shape Tool in C++ for Open 3D Engine
description: Learn to create a custom shape tool in C++ to extend Open 3D Engine (O3DE).
weight: 200
toc: true
---

> In this tutorial, you'll create a custom tool, **Shape Example**, written in C++ that extends **Open 3D Engine (O3DE) Editor**. The Shape Example tool allows you to create entities with a Shape component and configure their component properties. You'll learn how to use the `CppToolGem` template and practice C++ development with O3DE's Tools UI API and other O3DE APIs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, you'll create a custom tool, **Shape Example**, written in C++ that extends the **Open 3D Engine (O3DE) Editor**. The Shape Example tool allows you to create entities with a Shape component and configure their component properties. You'll learn how to use the `CppToolGem` template and practice C++ development with O3DE's Tools UI API and other O3DE APIs.
```

![An image of the Shape Example tool and some entities created by it.](/images/learning-guide/tutorials/custom-tools/shape-example/python-shape-example-demo.png)

This tutorial is based off of the **ShapeExample** Gem in [`o3de/sample-code-gems` repository](https://github.com/o3de/sample-code-gems/tree/main/cpp_gems/ShapeExample). You can reference the ShapeExample Gem sample as you follow along this tutorial.

> By the end of this tutorial, you'll be able to create your own tools that extends O3DE Editor.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By the end of this tutorial, you'll be able to create your own tools that extend the O3DE Editor.
```

## Create a tool with the `CppToolGem` template

> The `CppToolGem` template contains a basic C++ framework to create a dockable widget in O3DE Editor.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `CppToolGem` template contains a basic C++ framework to create a dockable tool (widget) in the O3DE Editor.
```

2. Set the placeholder text in `m_nameInput` by calling `setPlaceholderText(...)`.

3. Enable a button to clear the text using `setClearButtonEnabled(true)`.

```cpp
    m_nameInput = new QLineEdit(this);
    m_nameInput->setPlaceholderText(QObject::tr("Set custom Entity name here..."));
    m_nameInput->setClearButtonEnabled(true);
```

### Create a check box
A check box is an option button that users can enable or disable to trigger a user-defined behavior. With Qt, you can create an input field by using the `QCheckBox` object. In this example, the check box will control whether or not to append a suffix to the entity's name. At runtime, it will start disabled, and enable when the user enters the entity's name to the input field. You will define this behavior later.

1. Create a check box by instantiating `QCheckBox`. In this example, name it `m_addShapeNameSuffix`.

2. Set the check box to the start in the disabled state by using `setDisabled(true)`.

```cpp
    m_addShapeNameSuffix = new QCheckBox(this);
    m_addShapeNameSuffix->setDisabled(true);
```

### Add a signal listener with a slot handler

> Qt uses signals and slots to communicate between objects. Set up a signal listener such that when the user enters text into the input field at runtime, the check box automatically enables. 

Reviewer 2: Might want to have the text `signals and slots` be a link to the Qt docs on signals/slots:  https://doc.qt.io/qt-5/signalsandslots.html

In this example, the signal listener uses a slot handler, which is essentially a C++ function that a signal can connect to. 

1. Declare a slot in `Code/Source/ShapeExampleWidget.h` by using the `Q_SLOTS` macro.

    ```cpp
    private Q_SLOTS:
        void OnNameInputTextChanged(const QString& text);
    ```

> 2. Call `QObject::connect(...)` to create a connection between the input field (`m_nameInput`) to the signal (`QLineEdit::TextChanged`) and slot (ShapeExampleWidget::OnNameINputTextChanged`). Refer to the following line of `ShapeExampleWidget.cpp`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Call `QObject::connect(...)` to create a connection between the input field (`m_nameInput`) to the signal (`QLineEdit::textChanged`) and slot (ShapeExampleWidget::OnNameInputTextChanged`). Refer to the following line of `ShapeExampleWidget.cpp`.
```
